AI Toolkit docs migration (#7827)
microsoft/vscode-docs: docs/intelligentapps/models.md

---
Order: 3
Area: intelligentapps
TOCTitle: Models
ContentId:
PageTitle: AI models in AI Toolkit
DateApproved:
MetaDescription: Find a popular generative AI model by publisher and source. Bring your own model that is hosted with a URL, or select an Ollama model.
MetaSocialImage:
---

# Models in AI Toolkit

> ## Models supported

Author: updated

> AI Toolkit support a boradrange of generative AI models. Both Small Language Models (SLM) and Large Language Models (LLM) are supported.

Author: added into the top intro.

## Find a model

> On AI Toolkit, click the "Models" on treeview to open the model catalog, as shown in step 1.

Author: done.

![alt text](./images/models/model_catalog_new.png)

> There are a set of filters on model catalog as shown in step2:

Author: updated.

- Hosted by:

    AI Toolkit now supports GitHub, ONNX, OpenAI, Anthropic, Google as model hosting sources.
- Publisher:

    The publisher for AI models. e.g. Microsoft, Meta, Google, OpenAI, Anthropic, Mistral AI, etc.

- Task:

    Now only 'text generation' is for this filter.

- Device Type:

    Depends on the local availability, to filter models by CPU, GPU and NPU.

> Additional filters to filter modes that can run locally or remotely, with default to include all model types.

Author: removed.

> Fine-tuning Support switch filters only the model that can be used to run finetuning.

Author: made it clear.

## License and sign-in

> Some of the models require publisher or hosting service license and account to sign-in.

Author: added.

## Find model details

> Click on each model card in model catalog to find more details on the model.

Author: thanks for raising this, updated.

## Select a model for test

> On each model card, there are several options:

Author: added.

- **Try in Playground** link that can load selected model in playground for test without model downloading.
- **Download** link that will download the model to local first from source like Hugging Face.
- **Load in Playground** will load the downloaded model into playground for chat.

## Bring Your Own Models

> AI Toolkit's playground supports remote models. Mouse-over "MY MODELS" on treeview, a "+" sign appears to add a remote model into AI Toolkit. Fill in the requested information on model name, display name, model hosting URL and optional auth string. A remote model is added and shown in treeview as step3.

Author: updated

![alt text](./images/models/byom.png)

## Ollama models

> 

Author: added intro.

### Prerequisites

- AI Toolkit v0.6.2 or newer.
- [Ollama](https://ollama.com/download) (Tested on Ollama v0.4.1)

### Steps to add local Ollama into AI Toolkit

1. Click the "+" button while hovering on treeview **MY MODELS** or click the **+ Add model** button in model catalog or playground.

1. Select **Add an Ollama model**

    ![](./images/models/select-type.png)

1. Select **Select models from Ollama library**. Or if you start Ollama runtime at a different address, you can choose "Provide custom Ollama endpoint" to specify Ollama endpoint.

    ![](./images/models/select-ollama.png)

1. Select the models you want to add to AI Toolkit.

    ![](./images/models/select-models.png)

    > Please note that it will only show models that are already downloaded in Ollama and not already added to AI Toolkit. In order to download a model from Ollama you can run `ollama pull <model-name>`. You can see the list of models supported by Ollama in [Ollama library](https://ollama.com/library) or refer to [Ollama documentation](https://github.com/ollama/ollama).

> 1. You will see it on treeview's **MY MODELS** list. Use it the same way as other models in playground.

Author: added

---
Order: 2
Area: intelligentapps
TOCTitle: Models
ContentId:
PageTitle: AI Models in AI Toolkit
DateApproved:
MetaDescription: Find a popular generative AI model by publisher and source. Bring your own model that is hosted with a URL, or select an Ollama model.
MetaSocialImage:
---

# Models in AI Toolkit

AI Toolkit supports a broad range of generative AI models. Both Small Language Models (SLM) and Large Language Models (LLM) are supported.

To use an AI model in AI Toolkit, from model catalog you can find GitHub hosted models (Llama3, Phi-3, Mistral models), publisher hosted models (OpenAI ChatGPT models, Anthropic Claude, Google Gemini), models you can download from HuggingFace, Ollama models running locally, or Bring-Your-Own-Models that you can connect to from AI Toolkit.

## Find a model

> On AI Toolkit, select **Models** in the treeview to open the model catalog, as shown in step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find a model in the model catalog:

1. In the AI Toolkit view, select **CATALOG** > **Models* to open the model catalog
```

> ![Select model in model catalog](./images/models/model_catalog.png)

Author: replaced screenshot.

- Hosted by:

    AI Toolkit supports GitHub, ONNX, OpenAI, Anthropic, Google as model hosting sources.
- Publisher:

    The publisher for AI models, such as Microsoft, Meta, Google, OpenAI, Anthropic, Mistral AI, and more.

- Tasks:

    Currently, only `Text Generation` is supported.

- Model type:

    Filter models that can run remotely or locally on CPU, GPU, or NPU. This filter depends on the local availability.

`Fine-tuning Support` switch filters models that can be used to run finetuning.

If your model is self hosted or runs as Ollama local model, you can add them from the "+ Add model" as ollama model or custom model.

Select on each model card in model catalog to find more details on the model.

## License and sign-in

Some of the models require publisher or hosting service license and account to sign-in. You will be prompted when you select a model from model catalog that requires license, to run it in playground.

## Select a model for testing

Once you find the model of interest, you can test run this model for chat completeions in the playground.

On each model card, there are several options:

> - **Try in Playground** link that can load selected model in playground for test without model downloading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Try in Playground**: load the selected model for testing in the playground without downloading it
```

> - **Download** link that will download the model to local first from source like Hugging Face.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Download**: download the model from a source like Hugging Face
```

> - **Load in Playground** will load the downloaded model into playground for chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Load in Playground**: load a downloaded model into the playground for chat
```

## Bring your own models

AI Toolkit's playground also supports remote models.

> If you have a self hosted or deployed model that is accessible from internet, you can add it to AI Toolkit and use it in the playground.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a self-hosted or deployed model that is accessible from the internet, you can add it to AI Toolkit and use it in the playground.
```

1. Hover over **MY MODELS** in the treeview, and select the `+` icon to add a remote model into AI Toolkit.
1. Fill in the requested information, such as model name, display name, model hosting URL, and optional auth string.

![Bring Your Own Models](./images/models/byom.png)

## Add Ollama models

Ollama enables many popular genAI models to run locally with CPU via GGUF quantization. If you have Ollama installed on your local machine with downloaded Ollama models, you can add them to AI Toolkit to use in playground.

### Prerequisites

- AI Toolkit v0.6.2 or newer.
- [Ollama](https://ollama.com/download) (Tested on Ollama v0.4.1)

### Steps to add local Ollama into AI Toolkit

1. Select the "+" icon while hovering over **MY MODELS** in the treeview, or select the **+ Add model** button in the model catalog or playground.

1. Select **Add an Ollama model**

>     ![Select type](./images/models/select-type.png)

Reviewer: Improve the alt text to be more descriptive - do this for all alt texts please

> 1. Select **Select models from Ollama library**. Or if you start Ollama runtime at a different address, you can choose "Provide custom Ollama endpoint" to specify an Ollama endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select **Select models from Ollama library**. Or if you start Ollama runtime at a different address, you can choose **Provide custom Ollama endpoint** to specify an Ollama endpoint.
```

AI Toolkit supports a broad range of generative AI models. Both Small Language Models (SLM) and Large Language Models (LLM) are supported.

In the model catalog, you can access models from various sources:

- GitHub-hosted models (Llama3, Phi-3, Mistral models)
- Publisher-hosted models (OpenAI ChatGPT models, Anthropic Claude, Google Gemini)
- Locally downloaded models, for example from HuggingFace
- Locally running Ollama models
- Connect to Bring-Your-Own-Models

## Find a model

To find a model in the model catalog:

1. In the AI Toolkit view, select **CATALOG** > **Models** to open the model catalog

> 1. use the filters to reuce the list of available models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the filters to reduce the list of available models
```

>     ![Select model in model catalog](./images/models/model_catalog.png)

Reviewer: Put the screenshot after the list of filters
